Now that you know what factors are and how to create them in Python it's time to start learning how
to work with them.
So in this video I'm going to introduce you to adding and subtracting vectors.
It's actually pretty simple it's pretty straightforward.
And I will show you about multiplying vectors by scalar which is often called vector scalar multiplication.
Now if you're not familiar with what a scalar is.
I'm also going to explain that and you will see why these are called scholars but essentially a scalar
is just a single number.
All right.
So let's get started adding two vectors is pretty easy.
It's exactly how you would expect it should work.
So to add this vector to this vector all you do is add each individual element or each corresponding
element in turn.
So one plus two is three zero plus minus three is minus three and so on.
So needless to say two vectors can only be added together if they are the same size or the same dimensionality.
So this is a four dimensional vector and a four dimensional vector.
If this were only a three dimensional vector.
So imagine if you didn't have this one here then it would not be possible it would not be valid to add
together these two vectors because this fourth element here would.
Well you know he wouldn't have anyone to talk to.
So the addition just wouldn't be valid and subtracting two vectors of course is exactly the same concept.
You would just put a subtraction sine a minus sign here instead of a plus sine vector scalar multiplication
is also pretty straightforward.
So imagine V is some vector and Lambda This is a lowercase Greek letter lambda is a scalar so a scalar
is just a single number.
So for example if vector V is this vector minus 1 0 1 and Lambda where just the number 7 then to implement
this operation scalar vector multiplication all you do is multiply these scalar by each element in the
vector individually.
So this operation will produce this result minus 7 0 and 7.
So now I'm going to switch to Python and I'm going to skip right to the vector scalar multiplication
because I'm going to talk more about the vector addition in a few moments and also in the exercise so
in python you will also learn why a single number is called a scalar in the context of linear algebra
so let's get started.
So what I'm going to do is actually create a vector let's call that vector V and this will be a num
pi array and let's set this vector to be about point five.
Come on one.
And now what I'm going to do is create a list of scalar.
So it's gonna be a bunch of scholars.
How about 1 and minus point 5 and 2.
And just a regular point five.
And now what I'm going to do is show you in a plot this vector V Times each of these four scalar.
So remember I'm not considering this to be a vector.
This is not a four element vector.
It is a four element list in Python but in terms of linear algebra this is actually a collection of
scholars.
Okay.
So for let's call this s I N S so this is going to be the looping index variable here.
S.I. let's create a new vector that is the scaled version of V.
And that equals s I times V and then I'm gonna plot this.
So SPL BLT dot plot everything is gonna be in standard position.
So the X coordinate will go from zero to S V zero and then the y coordinates will go from zero to S
V.
1 and I'm gonna set this to be a line with circles on both sides of the line and make sure it's a nice
thick lines a line with equals 3.
And then I'm gonna set the label to be essentially the value of this scalar so I'm going to do this
using LaTeX coding so lambda equals percent G and then this gets replaced with S I.
All right.
And then let's see how this looks appealed appeal to that show.
Okay.
So here you see it looks like one line but really this is actually four separate lines that are all
being plotted.
And before I take a moment to interpret this I just want to make this plot look a little bit nicer.
So make it square.
I'll set the axis to go from minus three to plus three in both the x and y directions and let's see
help pull the put a grid on and of course we need to activate the legend.
All right.
I love watching these nicely formatted graphs just pop up before my eyes.
So let's see what we have here.
So when lambda equals 1 so lambda is the scalar that's the blue line which is kind of hidden behind
here but you see it here.
This is just the original line of course because we're multiplying this vector by the number one.
So it doesn't change anything.
So they're the coordinates are minus our side point 5 and 1 so that you see here and here is the origin.
So notice what happened when lambda was negative.
So he said minus point five.
And these the vector actually turned around and went the opposite direction although it's kind of still
on this one line you can imagine there's like this infinitely long line here and all these scaled versions
of this vector are lying on that line.
And when the scalar is negative it turns the direction of the vector around.
So it's like going the other way across zero.
And then I multiply it by two and it gets in the same direction but twice as long.
And that's a general feature of scalar vector multiplication that the scaled version of the vector will
never change direction so it never points off this way or this way the direction doesn't change but
the length of the line will change.
So we can get longer where it can get shorter.
It can point negative but it's still on the same line even if it's going negative.
So that's for vector scalar multiplication.
What I'd like to show you now is addition.
So let's create two vectors of color is v 1 and let's say this is like minus 1 and 2 and v 2 all set
to be one and one.
And so what I'm going to do now is show you three different ways of adding these factors together just
to show you a bit of variety so I'll call this some vector V three and then I'm going to call this one
V Three a because there's gonna be three different versions.
So V one plus V 2.
That's pretty straightforward.
V 3 B is going to be num PI that add v 1 comma v 2 and now 4 v 3 C I'm initially going to set this to
be zero.
So I'm going to initialize it as a num pi matrix of just zeros and then when I'm going to do is basically
loop through all the elements in these factors and add them up individually.
So for I in range of 0 to 2 and I'm using 2 here because these are two dimensional vectors they have
two elements in them v three C and then we want the IAF element or C there's a little typo here.
Let's say I equals V 1 I plus V 2 I.
So you can see I'm adding together all of the corresponding elements to get the resulting or the corresponding
element in the resulting vector.
So this is the mechanism that I showed you in the slides.
All right.
And let's see now I'm going to print v 3 a v 3 b and v 3 C.
Now it's no surprise that these are all exactly the same result the formatting looks a little bit different
but that doesn't matter.
These are all the same results.
Now in practice this is actually not really very good programming.
You don't want to have to use three lines of code for what you can easily accomplished in one line of
code either this way or this way.
However I do think that when you're learning math especially in the beginning of learning math and using
code to learn math it's interesting and insightful to see these kind of low level mechanistic details
being implemented at least once.
And then of course in practice in the future you would use either this method or this method so I just
explain to you how to add two vectors algebraic CLI like this.
So this vector plus this vector equals this vector and you just add them up each corresponding element
at a time.
What I want to do now right before the exercise is show you how to implement vector addition geometrically
so the geometric interpretation of vector addition.
So here is this yellow vector that's the vector 1 2.
And here's the blue vector 2 1.
So to add these two vectors geometrically what you do is you take one vector and you slide it on this
plane so you slide it such that the tail of this vector goes up to or starts at the head of the other
vector.
So that's going to look something like this.
You can see I'm just taking this blue vector.
Now it's not a fundamentally different vector.
It's just in a different location.
It's still going to units over and then one unit up.
So it's still the vector to one but I displaced it I've moved it so that the tail of the blue vector
starts at the head of the yellow vector.
And then you can see that we can draw a line or a vector that goes from the tail of the yellow vector
to the head of the blue vector.
And that line is these summed vector and you can see that also here from reading off the graph.
So that's three units over and three units up.
So this is the geometric interpretation of vector addition.
And that leads to the exercise which is to confirm that the geometric and algebraic interpretations
of vector addition converge.
So what you want to do is start with these two vectors so vector v 1.
I call this v 1 here is minus 1 2 vector 1 is 1 1 and then you add them up and of course you're going
to get 0 3 algebraic leaches just from adding each corresponding element and then you want to generate
a figure that looks like this.
So make sure that v 2 starts at the head of v 1 and then you should be able to confirm that this vector
here these some vector does indeed go from the tail of the first vector to the head of the second vector.
All right.
And then of course you should be doing this using variables and num pi arrays not just manually entering
in all of these individual coordinates.
All right.
So now's your chance to pause the video confirm that the geometric and algebraic perspectives converge.
And now I'm going to walk you through my solution so we already have our two vectors created here.
So V1 and V2.
So that saves us a little bit of time.
So I'm gonna start by making some plots so plot.
Let's see zero v 1 and actually you know what I think I'll do.
I'm gonna start by plotting all three of these vectors in the standard space.
So let's see.
Let's make this uh a nice thick line and set the label to be in later coded.
V 1.
And I'm just using later coding here just so this one here becomes a subscript of V.
Okay so that's for v 1 and then copy paste paste.
So now we have the 2 and v 3 A.
Of course v 3 A is equal to V 3 B is equal to V 3C but uh I'll just use v 3 8 here.
Okay so that's 2 and then 3 and let's see what this looks like.
Okay so here we get our 3 vectors.
Now they're all in standard space so this is not what the exercise requested of us but I just want to
make sure that I can get all three of these vectors in the same plot and make the plot look nice.
Let's see.
P L T the axis square and then set the axis to be about minus two to plus two.
And then so minus two to plus two on the x axis is good minus two two plus two on the y axis isn't going
to be good.
It's gonna cut off this green vector.
So how about minus two to plus four.
And of course we need the legend and the grid.
All right.
Looking good.
So now what I want to do is shift V2 so that the tail starts at the head of V1.
And now the way to think about that is implicitly when plotting V2 you can also write plus zero here.
So now by writing plus zero here what I'm actually doing is shifting the x coordinates by zero and shifting
the y coordinates by zero.
Now obviously for shifting by zero that does nothing but it's a very very small step from this concept
of shifting the entire vector by zero to shifting the entire vector by v 1.
So now I've shifted the x axis coordinates by the x axis coordinate a V1 and I'm shifting the y axis
coordinates of V2 according to the y axis coordinate of the one like this.
All right.
And it's as simple as that.
That's how you would move this other vector around.
Okay.
And then the last thing I want to do is print this out in latex.
So let's see.
Display math and I'm going to set this to B.
Percent x plus percent x equals percent.
S so that's going to say v 1 plus V 2 equals V 3.
Of course with not with these letters V and the underscore number but instead with the actual results.
So now of course to do this.
So we need to set this to be converted into simple objects and then converted into latex code.
And just to make the code a little bit nicer I'm going to say SDR 1 actually.
I'll maybe I'll even say just S1 equals sim that later OK and then Sim does simplify and then V1 so
I think this is a little bit nicer because now here I can just write S1 and then S2 and S3.
So that makes this code a little bit more compact.
It's a little bit easier to read compared to if I had to put this you know all of this code in here
three times.
So let's see that's two and that was three a whoops.
Copy paste mistake.
How many times in this course have I warned you to be super careful when copying and pasting code.
This is one of those things where you know I do as I say not as I do anyway.
So this is looking good and I would call this a successful completion of this exercise.
So that concludes this video in which you learned about adding vectors and multiplying vectors by scalar
is both algebraic CLI and geometrically.
The next video is going to feature the dot product which is perhaps the single most important operation
in all of linear algebra.
So put on your thinking cap.
Drink some tea or some coffee or some juice and I will see you in the next video.